How AI is Changing the Way You Teach
Educators use artificial intelligence to support, not replace, the human connection in learning.
A woman working on a laptop displaying a brain shape surrounded by artificial intelligence icons.Adobe

Listen
0:00 / 10:47

1x


0:00 / 10:47

By: Brenda Álvarez, Senior Writer
Published: January 9, 2026
SHARE
bluesky
facebook
“Artificial Intelligence (AI) is like having a personal assistant that wants to help you. It thinks the world of you. In fact, you are its world.”

This is how computer science and media electives teacher Julie York explains artificial intelligence to her students at South Portland High School, in Maine. But, she continues, this is where it gets tricky:

So you have this biased assistant that thinks you can never be wrong or ask for something dangerous. Keep in mind this assistant only has a middle school education and lacks ethics, but is really fast at doing some things, but not all things. Sometimes, it will want to help you so much—
just to make you happy—that it will lie to you.

STILL UNDER REVIEW

While proponents may promise that AI will revolutionize education, it’s still being defined by humans.

For some, AI is a trusted tool, a helper, a thought-partner, and a guide that amplifies creativity and saves time. For others, it’s a shortcut that risks stripping away what matters most in learning: The human connection.

So how are educators using AI, and what’s a boundary they would never cross? Four educators—from California, Maine, Michigan, and Utah— are testing limits, setting expectations, and under­scoring that the most important factor in using AI is the human one.
 


AI IN ELEMENTARY SCHOOL

Two years ago, veteran high school educator Kecia Waddell switched to teaching elementary school­. She was in unfamiliar territory.

Unsure if her teaching methods and style would transfer to second-grade students, Waddell turned to AI, a tool she had used previously with her high school students.

“I leveraged AI to help teach me how to better engage with students,” says Waddell, a special education teacher at Monfort Elementary School, in Shelby Township, Mich.

She has used the technology to personalize assignments as well as to analyze students’ individualized education program goals and align them with skill standards outlined in the district’s report card.

A woman poses in front of a yellow backdrop wearing a t-shirt that reads" Teacher the Original AI (Actual Instructor)
Kecia Waddell
For example, Waddell used AI to connect language and student self-expression in a classroom coloring activity. Waddell had her students explain to her what kind of coloring sheet they wanted. She would prompt AI with their requests.

“I’m typing out the words, but [the students] have to use language … and expand their vocabulary,” Waddell says. “[AI] gives us superpowers for what we do for our young learners,” she adds.

For her students, she says the technology builds on transferable skills they need for socializing, expanding their vocabulary, and writing.

What doesn’t Waddell do with AI? Give students unsupervised access to it or input data with identifying information. Human oversight is needed, she cautions.

“I want to have control over how I use it, and I don’t want … people misusing technology,” she explains.

AI IN MIDDLE SCHOOL

Instructional coach Kristin van Brunt approaches AI as an extension of critical thinking. “It’s a helper, not a replacement for thought,” says van Brunt, who works at Mueller Park Junior High, in Davis County, Utah.

She explains that if students were reading Animal Farm, she would require them to think about some of the themes in the book before turning to technology. “They have to think about it first, come up with ideas, and then put those into AI, and ask which one would be a good topic to explore,” van Brunt explains.

Another approach is to have students find connections between a book and their own lives.

“Instead of saying, analyze the themes in Of Mice and Men, I would say, compare the theme in [the book] to a time that someone you know faced a difficult decision,” she says. “They could use AI to come up with a theme, but they have to tie it to themselves.”

This kind of personalization, she believes, keeps students from having AI do all the work.

Throughout the years, van Brunt has used AI to prepare lesson plans and student activities, differentiate assignments to ensure students can engage with the material, and work one-on-one with other educators.